A Little History of the World
E H Gombrich (2005)
A sophisticated narrative by the art historian which runs up to the First World War, written in language any child can understand. Although written in German in 1935, it was only published in English 10 years ago. Insisting he be the sole translator, Gombrich had not finished rewriting it when he died in his nineties.

Tales from Shakespeare
Charles and Mary Lamb (1807)
These retellings of the plays are literary classics in their own right.

Our Island Story
H E Marshall (1905)
An excellent single-volume history of Britain, in simple and elegant language, warmed by an uncomplicated national pride.

The Diary of a Young Girl
Anne Frank (published in English in 1952)
The diary kept by a young Dutch-Jewish girl during the two years in which her family lived concealed under the Nazi occupation of Holland. Her words remain the most effective way for a child today to grasp the reality of the Holocaust.

The Oxford Nursery Rhyme Book
Edited by Iona and Julian Opie (1951)
This chunky and charmingly old-fashioned volume contains every nursery rhyme you can possibly think of (and many you couldn't).

Tales of Hans Christian Andersen
Translated by Naomi Lewis and illustrated by Joel Stewart (2009)
Andrew Lang’s fin de siècle collections of fairy tales are great, but this illustrated collection of Hans Christian Andersen's stories would make a good starter.

The Complete Nonsense of Edward Lear
Collected by Faber (2001)
There are beautiful editions of individual poems, such as “The Quangle Wangle’s Hat” (illustrated by Helen Oxenbury, Mammoth), but why not opt for the collected works?

The Hutchinson Treasury of Children’s Literature
Edited by Alison Sage, foreword by Quentin Blake (1995)
Every child’s book shelf needs the breadth of an anthology, and this one contains nearly 100 extracts from nursery rhymes, fairy tales and all kinds of stories.

Horrible Histories: Rotten Romans
Terry Deary, illustrated by Martin Brown (1994)
Now a vast franchise, the Horrible Histories phenomenon emerged in the early Nineties. The slim books adopt a subversive, jokey voice but the historical points they make are serious.

The Way Things Work
David Macaulay (2004)
Revised from the hit 1988 version, this is a highly entertaining guide to physics. A busy fleet of woolly mammoths operate the levers and pulleys of everyday machinery.
