Curious George
H A Rey (1941)
The first book of seven about a mischievous monkey who is kidnapped by the man in the yellow hat.

Where the Wild Things Are
Maurice Sendak (1963)
A childhood favourite for so many, this went on to inspire a generation of illustrators – and a very poor film.

Father Christmas
Raymond Briggs (1973)
The best book about Christmas by some margin, featuring an extremely grumpy Santa. Narrowly beat The Snowman for a place on this list.

Gorilla
Anthony Browne (1983)
A beautifully drawn story from the former children’s laureate about a lonely girl who finds company in a gorilla.

The Mick Inkpen Collection
Mick Inkpen (2009)
This edition contains seven stories, including the beguiling Billy’s Beetle — you have to find the beetle hiding somewhere on each spread.

There was an Old Lady who Swallowed a Fly
Pam Adams (1972)
The recent Child's Play edition is a board book with holes.

The Babar Collection
Jean de Brunhoff (from 1931; this collection published in 2008)
Here are five of the classic French stories, including the first, The Story of Babar.

Jim, Who Ran Away from His Nurse and Was Eaten by a Lion
Hilaire Belloc (1907)
The poem is reproduced at picture-book length with Grey’s striking illustrations and paper engineering. “Contains a Dangerous Beast and a Miserable End,” promises the cover.

Polar Bear, Polar Bear, What Do You Hear?
Eric Carle (1991)
This charming verse story about how different animals behave is less well known than Eric Carle's The Very Hungry Caterpillar, but more fun.

What Do People Do All Day?
Richard Scarry (1968)
Scarry’s immensely detailed books about everyday life can lead to some good conversations, and are great for children who need to know how things work (more or less all of them).

The Story of the Little Mole Who Knew It Was None of His Business
Werner Holzwarth and Wolf Erlbruch (1989)
This may not be to everyone’s taste, but there’s no escaping the lavatory when it comes to children’s humour, and this book (translated from the original German) manages to be educational too.

Green Eggs and Ham
Dr Seuss (1960)
Or another of the vast number of books Dr Seuss wrote from the Forties onwards. Excellent fun in verse, and great for learning to read, too.

Lost and Found
Oliver Jeffers (2005)
"What is a boy to do when a penguin turns up at his front door?" So begins this whimsical adventure, already a modern classic.

Adventures of Mrs Pepperpot
Alf Prøysen (1956)
Illustrated by Hilda Offen, the Red Fox edition contains two abridged versions of these well-loved Norwegian stories about the woman who shrinks.

The Gruffalo
Julia Donaldson and Axel Scheffler (1999)
It may now be over-familiar, but it’s hard to imagine a library without one of Donaldson’s catchy rhyming tales.

Monkey and Me
Emily Gravett (2007)
Like Gravett’s Orange, Pear, Apple, Bear, this book by an exceptional writer and illustrator is for very young children. For older children of five plus, try Meerkat Mail.

Goodnight Moon
Margaret Wise Brown and Clement Hurd (1947)
A perfectly soporific bedtime story. Ditto the following.

Time for Bed
Mem Fox and Jane Dyer (1993)
You’ll read these books so many times, it’s important to have more than one.

Operation Alphabet
Al MacCuish and Luciano Lozano (2011)
One of the best books about the alphabet, from Thames and Hudson's The Ministry of Letters series.

Hippos Go Beserk!
Sandra Boynton (1977)
Concerning a lonely hippo who is visited at home by various hippo comrades, this jolly counting book goes down as well as up.

The Tiger Who Came to Tea
Judith Kerr (1968)
Kerr’s books about Mog the cat are still going strong, but this stand-alone story is perhaps her most original.

Funnybones
Janet and Allan Ahlberg (1980)
Or one of the Ahlbergs' other classic illustrated tales such as Peepo or Each Peach Pear Plum.

Elmer
David McKee (1968)
A sideways look at diversity: the good-natured patchwork elephant disguises his true colour to fit in better with the grey herd, to miserable effect.

I Love You, Blue Kangaroo
Emma Chichester Clark (1998)
Her loveliest story about Lily and her favourite toy.

Little Tim and the Brave Sea Captain
Edward Ardizzone (1936)
The first in the series, in which the irrepressible Tim stows away aboard a steamer in high winds.

Bread and Jam for Frances
Russell Hoban (1964)
A charming story about a fussy eater.

The Princess and the Pea
Lauren Child (2006)
Though undoubtedly more famous for her Charlie and Lola series, Lauren Child’s retelling of this classic fairy tale is wildly inventive. The visuals are created with Polly Borland's photographs of a miniature dolls’ house.

The Velveteen Rabbit
Margery Williams and William Nicholson (1922)
The timeless story of a stuffed rabbit and its quest to become real.

This Is Not My Hat
Jon Klassen (2012)
Concerning a hat-thieving fish, this winsome tale of rough justice won the 2014 Kate Greenaway Medal and the 2013 Randolph Caldecott Medal in America.

Maps
Aleksandra and Daniel Mizielinska (2013)
This charmingly quirky set of drawings of the world, laced with facts and figures, was a surprise bestseller.
